Add Dask documentation (#529)
ResearchComputing/Documentation: docs/programming/dask.md

# Dask

## What is Dask?

[Dask](https://docs.dask.org/en/stable/index.html) is a parallel computing library in Python that allows you to scale computations from a single machine to a distributed cluster. It is particularly useful when:

* Your data does not fit in memory
* Your code is CPU-bound and slow
* You want to parallelize Python workflows without rewriting everything

Dask integrates well with familiar libraries like `NumPy` and `pandas`, making it easier to scale existing workflows.

## Dask Distributed Cluster

> We can basically think of the Dask scheduler as our task orchestrator. To perform work, a scheduler must be assigned resources in the form of a Dask cluster. The Dask cluster has three main components for processing computations in parallel. These are the client, the scheduler and the workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can basically think of the Dask scheduler as our task orchestrator. To perform work, a scheduler must be assigned resources in the form of a Dask cluster. The Dask cluster has three main components for processing computations in parallel. These are the *client*, the *scheduler*, and the *workers*.
```

* When we code, we communicate directly with the client, which is responsible for submitting tasks to be executed to the scheduler. It allows you to:
    - Submit work
    - Monitor progress

>     - Access the dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The *client* is responsible for submitting tasks to be executed to the *scheduler*. It also enables you to monitor job progress and access the dashboard.
```

Reviewer: I recommend using either a short sentence or a bulleted list. My preference would be for a short sentence, but feel to disagree and use the bulleted list instead.

* After receiving the tasks from the client, the scheduler determines how tasks will be distributed among the workers and coordinates them to process tasks in parallel. It:
    - Receives tasks from your Python code
    - Decides how to execute them

>     - Distributes them to workers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The *scheduler* determines how *client* tasks will be distributed among the *workers* and coordinates the parallelized workload. 
```

* Finally, the workers compute tasks and store and return computations results. Workers can be threads, processes, or separate machines in a cluster. Each worker:
    - Runs tasks assigned by the scheduler
    - Uses CPU cores and memory

>     - Can run on the same node or across multiple nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The *workers* compute tasks and store and return computations results. *Workers* can be threads, processes, or separate machines in a cluster. 
```

> ![](./dask_images/distributed_cluster.png) 

Reviewer: As a general note - we'll need to add alternative text for all of the screenshots. Also, for screenshots that include notes / commands, we'll need to ensure that information is still accessible in the tutorial. For example, we could add a caption that details this information (if not already covered in the nearby instructions).

Reviewer: If time allows, consider reformatting as a split column layout. With the description of Dask on the left and the image on the right. This could be done with sphinx grids: 
https://sphinx-design.readthedocs.io/en/stable/grids.html

> ### Setting up a Local Cluster

Reviewer: We might want to add a Pre-Step that shows or references the Jupyter Notebooks configuration in Open OnDemand. This is important because the "n_workers=4" is likely related to the provided configurations (i.e. 4 cores, 4 hours). 

This doesn't have to be a thorough discussion - we can also just have a link that points to the relevant OnDemand page in the RTD docs.

A `LocalCluster` runs all components on a single node and is useful for development and small-scale parallel workloads.

For this we need to set up a `LocalCluster` using `dask.distributed` and connect a `client` to it.

```
from dask.distributed import LocalCluster, Client

cluster = LocalCluster(
    n_workers=4,          
    threads_per_worker=2,
    memory_limit='auto'
)
cluster
```

> ![](./dask_images/dask-plugin-2.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility Suggestion: Add an "aria-details" tag to the image that points to the code block above. Will need to add "id" to containing div. But that would help users find the relevant code that is provided in the image. 

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-details

Reviewer: Maybe also expand the code block to include the results, so that a screen reader can find the results
Example: 
The results of running this code will be a results box containing information on the LocalCluster:

* Dashboard : <URL For Dashboard Here>
* Total Threads: <Number of Threads = n_workers * threads_per_worker >
* Status: <running, pending, stopped, failed, etc.>
* Workers: <n_workers>
* Using Processes: <Boolean>

If no arguments are provided, Dask will automatically configure workers based on available CPU cores and memory. In an Open OnDemand Jupyter session, this corresponds to the resources requested for that session.

```{note}

> `LocalCluster()` takes a lot of optional arguments, allowing you to configure the number of processes/threads, memory limits and other settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LocalCluster()` can take additional (optional) arguments, allowing you to more precisely control its configuration. You can learn more about these arguments in the [Dask online documentation](https://docs.dask.org/en/stable/deploying-python.html#reference). 
```

```

> And then we create a `client` to connect to our cluster, passing the `Client` function the cluster object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the cluster has been created, we will need to connect to through a `client`. To create a `client`, pass the `cluster` object to `Client()` function:
```

```
client = Client(cluster)
client
```
From here, you can continue to run `Dask` commands as normal.

When finished, close the client to release resources:
```
client.close()
```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Through the `client`, you can run `Dask` commands and have the local cluster manager process your work. Once you have finished using the client, you will need to close the client in order to release its resources:
```
client.close()
```

If you have finished using the local cluster, you can similarly close it and release the cluster's resources: 

```
cluster.close()

# Or close both the client and cluster in one step:
client.shutdown()
```

````

## Dask Dashboard

> Dask comes with a really handy interface: the Dask Dashboard. It is a web interface that provides real-time insights into task execution, CPU and memory usage and worker activity. You can retrieve the dashboard link using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dask comes with a really handy interface: the Dask Dashboard. It is a web interface that provides real-time insights into task execution, CPU and memory usage, and worker activity. You can retrieve the dashboard link using:
```

```
client
```
And in the dropdown menu on *Cluster Info*:
```
Dashboard http://127.0.0.1:8787/status
Total threads: 2
Status: running
Workers: 4
Using processes: True
```

> ![](./dask_images/dask-plugin-3.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility Note - add aria-details which points to the code snippet above. The alternative text will need to note that this is a screenshot of the "client" results.

You can also find your cluster dashboard link using :
```
cluster.dashboard_link
```

Direct access to this link will not work in an Open OnDemand session. Instead, the dashboard must be accessed through the Jupyter proxy. For this append `/proxy/8787/status` to you current session's url like such:
`https://<ood-session-url>/proxy/8787/status`

Example: 
`https://ondemand.rc.colorado.edu/node/<node-name>/<port-number>/proxy/8787/status`

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

```{warning}
The provided link for the dashboard will not work in an Open OnDemand session as-is. The dashboard must be accessed through the Jupyter proxy. To do this, append `/proxy/8787/status` to you current session's url like so:
`https://<ood-session-url>/proxy/8787/status`

Example: 
`https://ondemand.rc.colorado.edu/node/<node-name>/<port-number>/proxy/8787/status`

```

````

> We will use the [JupyterLab plugin for Dask](https://github.com/dask/dask-labextension) to access the dashboard. This extension provides a graphical interface for launching clusters and viewing embedded dashboard panels directly within JupyterLab. Because JupyterLab extensions are tied to specific environments, you will need to create and use a dedicated Conda environment with the extension installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### JupyterLab Plugin for Dask

Alternatively, you can access the Dask Dashboard using the [JupyterLab plugin for Dask](https://github.com/dask/dask-labextension). This extension provides a graphical interface for launching clusters and viewing embedded dashboard panels directly within JupyterLab. Because JupyterLab extensions are tied to specific environments, you will need to create and use a dedicated Conda environment with the extension installed.
```

> Step 1: Create a Conda Environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 1: Create a Conda Environment
```

> 
> ```
> module load anaconda
> conda create -n dask_lab_env python=3.10 -y
> conda activate dask_lab_env
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
#From a login node
acompile --ntasks=4
module load anaconda
conda create -n dask_lab_env python=3.10 -y
conda activate dask_lab_env
```
````

Reviewer: Some users might try to do this from the Jupyter Notebook/Lab in OOD. While that will enable them to create the environment, they may then struggle with actually re-launching Jupyter Notebook. I.e. they might try to use this new environment from the active Jupyter Session - which won't work.

> Step 2: Install Required Packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 2: Install Required Packages
```

```
(dask_lab_env)[johndoe@c3cpu-a5-u11-1 ~]$ conda install -c conda-forge jupyterlab dask distributed
```
Then you can install the [JupyterLab plugin for Dask](https://github.com/dask/dask-labextension)
```
(dask_lab_env)[johndoe@c3cpu-a5-u11-1 ~]$ conda install -c conda-forge nodejs
(dask_lab_env)[johndoe@c3cpu-a5-u11-1 ~]$ conda install -c conda-forge dask-labextension
```

> Step 3: Launch a Jupyter Session using your custom environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 3: Launch a Jupyter Session using your custom environment
```

Once your environment is set up, launch a Jupyter Session using the `dask_lab_env` environment that includes the extension. 

Refer to the documentation here for detailed instructions on selecting and launching a [jupyter session with custom Conda environment](../open_ondemand/jupyter_session.md#launching-a-jupyter-session-using-my-conda-env-conda-environment)

> Step 4: Use the Extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 4: Use the Dask Extension
```

> After launching JupyterLab, open the Dask tab from the left sidebar. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After launching JupyterLab, open the Dask tab from the left sidebar.  

```

Reviewer: May need a <br> to add additional spacing between the screenshot and the above sentence.

> ![](./dask_images/dask-plugin-1.png) 

Reviewer: For alternative next - will need to denote the button is on the left. 

For aria-details, provide a code snippet that includes the code shown in the screenshot: 

import os
import dask

from dask.distrubuted import LocalCluster, Client

cluster = LocalCluster(
    n_workers=4,
    threads_per_worker=1,
    processes=TRUE,
    dashboard_address=":8787"
)

From there, add the url to connect to the dashboard. You will just need too look at the html link you have for your jupyterlab, and Dask dashboard port number, as highlighted in the figure below.

> ![](./dask_images/dask-plugin-4.png) 

Reviewer: Add alternative text, noting this is a screenshot

aria-display - point to a new paragraph that explains and provides examples for modifying the URL 

OR - have it point to the previous section above that detailed this process. I.e. add a hyperlink to the warning 

"Direct access to this link will not work in an Open OnDemand session. Instead, the dashboard must be accessed through the Jupyter proxy. [...]"

> ![](./dask_images/dask-plugin-5.png) 

Reviewer: Alt text which explains that the list of panels

alt-description can point to the following paragraph which explains how to interact with the orange panels.

You can click on any of the orange panels shown in the figure and drag them to arrange the layout as needed. This makes it much easier to understand how your computation is progressing and how tasks are distributed across workers.

> ![](./dask_images/exampledasklab.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility: 

Alt -text : explain that it is showing an example dashboard.

> There’s much to say about interpreting the Dask dashboard’s diagnostics. We recommend this documentation to understand the [basics of the dashboard diagnostics](https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/dashboard.html#dashboard-memory) and [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N_GqzcuGLCY) as a deeper dive into the dashboard’s functions.

Reviewer: ````suggestion

```{note}
To learn more about using and modifying the Dask dashboard, please see the official documentation on the [basics of the dashboard diagnostics](https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/dashboard.html#dashboard-memory).
```

````

## Example: Estimating π with NumPy and Dask

In this example, we estimate the value of π using a Monte Carlo method. The initial implementation uses NumPy and runs serially.

This approach avoids explicit Python loops by leveraging vectorized NumPy operations. The computation generates random (x, y) points and determines how many fall inside the unit circle. As the number of sampled points increases, the estimate of π improves.

```
import numpy as np

def calculate_pi(size_in_bytes):
    
    """Calculate pi using a Monte Carlo method."""
    
    rand_array_shape = (int(size_in_bytes / 8 / 2), 2)
    
    # 2D random array with positions (x, y)
    xy = np.random.uniform(low=0.0, high=1.0, size=rand_array_shape)
    
    # check if position (x, y) is in unit circle
    xy_inside_circle = (xy ** 2).sum(axis=1) < 1

    # pi is the fraction of points in circle x 4
    pi = 4 * xy_inside_circle.sum() / xy_inside_circle.size

    print(f"\nfrom {xy.nbytes / 1e9} GB randomly chosen positions")
    print(f"   pi estimate: {pi}")
    print(f"   pi error: {abs(pi - np.pi)}\n")
    
    return pi
```

> Run the function:
> ```
> %time calculate_pi(10000)
> ```
> This execution is entirely serial and runs on a single core.
> 
> Output:

Reviewer: ````suggestion

### Serial Calculation (Baseline)

To evaluate Dask's performance in calculating π, we will need an initial baseline to compare against. By running the code snippet below, we can determine how long it takes for `calculate_pi` to run in serial using a single core:

```
%time calculate_pi(10000)
```
 
Output:
````

```
from 1e-05 GB randomly chosen positions
   pi estimate: 3.072
   pi error: 0.06959265358979305

CPU times: user 2.06 ms, sys: 1.44 ms, total: 3.5ms
Wall time: 2.78 ms

3.072
```

> Let's parallelize this with Dask

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Parallelized Calculation with Dask
```

> Dask can parallelize this computation without modifying the original function. By using `dask.delayed`, we construct a task graph that represents the computation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A key benefit of Dask is that it can parallelize computations without needing to modifying the original function (`calculate_pi`). By using `dask.delayed`, we construct a task graph that represents the computation.
```

```
from dask.distributed import Client
import dask

client = Client(n_workers=2, threads_per_worker=2, memory_limit="auto")

dask_calpi = dask.delayed(calculate_pi)(10000)
```
At this stage, the computation has not yet been executed. The delayed object defines the task, but execution is deferred.

To run the computation, use `dask.compute`:

```
%time dask.compute(dask_calpi)
```

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion - Add an example readout similar to the one provided earlier to help with comparing serial vs dask calculations.

> Dask provides tools to visualize how computations are structured. This can help identify parallelism and bottlenecks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Visualizing the Task Graph

Dask provides tools to visualize how computations are structured. This can help identify parallelism and bottlenecks.
```

```
dask.visualize(dask_calpi)
```

```{note}

> To use `dask.visualize` within JupyterLab, install the required dependency: `conda install ipycytoscape`.

Reviewer: Recommendation - To simplify the tutorial experience, leave the note here but also include this package in the list of dependency provided earlier on for setting up the dask dashboard.

Author: I think it makes sense to keep this as an optional dependency rather than including it in the base installation. The ipycytoscape package is only required for users who want to use dask.visualize, and it isn’t needed for the core dashboard functionality itself. Since not all users will need the visualization feature, keeping it as an on-demand install helps keep the base setup lighter and avoids adding unnecessary dependencies for the standard workflow.

```

The resulting graph shows a single task, indicating that no parallelism is being utilized.

> ![](./dask_images/dask-calcpi-graph-1.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility: Need alt text

To take advantage of parallel execution, the workload must be split into multiple independent tasks. This can be done by invoking the function multiple times with different inputs.

```
results = []

for i in range(5):
    dask_calpi = dask.delayed(calculate_pi)(10000 * (i + 1))
    results.append(dask_calpi)

dask.visualize(results)

# Execute all tasks
# dask.compute(*results)
```

This produces a task graph with multiple independent tasks that can be executed concurrently across available workers.

> ![](./dask_images/dask-calcpi-graph-2.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility: Alt text needed. 

Question - does Dask provide alt text? If so, we can use that here so that match what a user would actually see when using the visualization tool.

Author: Dask does not provide alt text for the task graph visualizations generated via dask.visualize. The output is a rendered image/graph without accessibility metadata, so I have added alt text manually.

## Dask Arrays

> Dask Arrays are basically parallelized version of NumPy arrays for processing *larger-than-memory* data sets. Each of these NumPy arrays within the `dask.array` is called a chunk. Choosing how these chunks are arranged within the `dask.array` and their size can significantly affect the performance of our code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dask Arrays are basically a parallelized version of NumPy arrays for processing *larger-than-memory* data sets. Each of these NumPy arrays within the `dask.array` is called a chunk. Choosing how these chunks are arranged within the `dask.array` and their size can significantly affect the performance of our code. 
```

> ![](./dask_images/dask-array.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility: Needs alt-text

In the following example, we create a large random array using Dask and explicitly define how the array is divided into chunks.

```
import dask.array as da
x = da.random.random((10000, 10000), chunks=(1000, 1000))
```

> The array has a total shape of 10,000 by 10,000, and it is divided into chunks of size 1,000 by 1,000. This means the full array is broken into multiple smaller blocks that can be processed independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Dask array has a total shape of 10,000 by 10,000, and it is divided into chunks of size 1,000 by 1,000. Each of these smaller chunks can be independently processed.
```

At this stage, no computation is performed. Dask only constructs a task graph that describes how the array should be computed. 

### Lazy Computation

We now define a computation on the array by combining it with its transpose and computing the mean.
```
y = (x + x.T).mean()
```
This operation creates a new expression that includes element-wise addition and a reduction step. However, no actual numerical computation is executed at this point. Instead, Dask continues to build the task graph that represents the computation. This lazy evaluation model allows Dask to optimize and schedule work before any data is loaded into memory.

To execute the computation and obtain a result, we explicitly call the compute method.
```
y.compute()
```

When this function is called, Dask evaluates the task graph by dividing the work into chunks, distributing the computation across available workers, executing tasks in parallel, and finally combining the intermediate results into a single output.

> ![](./dask_images/dask-array-output.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility: Alt-text, and aria-details pointing to code snippet

Suggestion - to help compare the simple and complex examples consider having both show the same graph display.

> If you want a a more complex workflow involving multiple chained operations, use the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a more complex workflow, involving multiple chained operations, use the following example:
```

> ```
> x = da.random.random((20000, 20000), chunks=(2000, 2000))
> y = (x + x.T).mean(axis=0)
> z = y.std()
> 
> result = z.compute()
> result
> ```
> 
> Here we first create a large 20,000 by 20,000 random array and divide it into chunks of 2,000 by 2,000. This results in a grid of independent blocks that can be processed in parallel. Then compute the sum of the array and its transpose, followed by a mean across axis 0. This operation reduces the dimensionality of the dataset but still remains in a lazy state. We perform a second transofrmation, computing the standard deviation of the intermediate result. Finally, we call compute on the result. 
> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
#Create a larger random array of (20,000 x 20,000) 
x = da.random.random((20000, 20000), chunks=(2000, 2000))

#Compute the mean of the array and reduce dimensionality (axis=0)
y = (x + x.T).mean(axis=0)

#Finally, calculate the standard deviation for the intermediate results 
z = y.std()

result = z.compute()
result
```

````

> ![](./dask_images/dask-plugin-9.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility: Alt-text, and aria-details pointing to code snippet

Author: The goal of this screenshot was to show an example of code execution alongside the embedded Dask dashboard in JupyterLab. The code itself is the same as the one already covered step-by-step in the Dask arrays section, so it may be better not to add the second snippet of code here to avoid any confusion. Let me know what you think about that.

### Blocked Algorithms
Dask Arrays are implemented using blocked algorithms. These algorithms break up a computation on a large array into many computations on smaller pieces of the array. This minimizes the memory load (amount of RAM) of computations and allows for working with larger-than-memory datasets in parallel.

Let’s see what this means in an example:

> ```
> x = da.random.random(20, chunks=5)
> result = x.sum()
> 
> result.compute()
> # result.visualize() #uncomment to visualise it
> ```
> This will generate a random array, and it will automatically create the tasks, and from there the sums will be parallelised. This is similar to what you would see in MPI, but much easier to implement.
> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
#Generate a random array
x = da.random.random(20, chunks=5)

#Calculate the sum
result = x.sum()

#Parallelize the computation
result.compute()
# result.visualize() #uncomment to visualize the task graph
```

````

> ![](./dask_images/dask-array-output2.png) 

Reviewer: Accessibility: Alt Text

Check if Dask provides alt-text for the visualization.

## Dask Dataframes

When we analyze tabular data, we usually start our analysis by loading it into memory as a Pandas DataFrame. But what if this data does not fit in memory? In such cases, Dask’s scalable alternative to a Pandas DataFrame is the `dask.dataframe`. A `dask.dataframe` comprises many `pd.DataFrames`, each containing a subset of rows of the original dataset. We call each of these pandas pieces a partition of the `dask.dataframe`.

In short: Dask DataFrames extend pandas for parallel and *out-of-core* data processing.

![](./dask_images/dask-dataframes.png) 

A simple example for this would be:

> 1. Creating a Dask DataFrame

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Creating a Dask DataFrame
```

```
import dask.dataframe as dd
df = dd.read_csv("data/file.csv")
df
```
This creates a lazy DataFrame composed of many partitions.

> 2. Then we can perform some basic operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2. Basic Data Operations:
```

```
#filter operation
filtered = df[df["column"] > 10]

# Groupby operation
grouped = filtered.groupby("category").mean()
grouped
```
Keep in mind that nothing is computed yet.

> 3. To trigger Computation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Trigger Computation:
```

```{figure} ./dask_images/distributed_cluster.png
:alt: A flowchart labeled 'DASK' illustrating the relationships between components. It includes 'Client', 'Scheduler', 'Results', 'Developer', and 'Workers' in labeled boxes connected by arrows, depicting the information flow and process interactions.
:align: center
:width: 550px
```

### Setting up a Local Cluster

A `LocalCluster` runs all components on a single node and is useful for development and small-scale parallel workloads.

For this we need to set up a `LocalCluster` using `dask.distributed` and connect a `client` to it.

```
from dask.distributed import LocalCluster, Client

cluster = LocalCluster(
    n_workers=4,          
    threads_per_worker=2,
    memory_limit='auto'
)
cluster
```

- `n_workers=4` creates four worker processes
- `threads_per_worker=2` assigns two threads to each worker
- `memory_limit='auto'` lets Dask automatically manage memory allocation

Running the above code snippet provides the following output:

```
LocalCluster information:

Dashboard: http://127.0.0.1:8787/status
Total threads: 8
Status: running
Workers: 4
Using processes: True
```

```{figure} ./dask_images/dask-plugin-2.png

> :alt: A screenshot of a Jupyter Notebook displaying Python code for Dask. The code imports libraries, sets up a LocalCluster with specific parameters, and shows cluster details such as the number of workers, total threads, and status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:alt: A screenshot of a Jupyter Notebook displaying Python code for Dask that imports libraries, sets up a LocalCluster with specific parameters, and shows cluster details such as the number of workers, total threads, and status. Described under the heading Setting up a Local Cluster.
```

client
```

Through the `client`, you can run `Dask` commands and have the local cluster manager process your work. Once you have finished using the client, you will need to close the client in order to release its resources:

```
client.close()
```
If you have finished using the local cluster, you can similarly close it and release the cluster's resources: 
```
cluster.close()
# Or close both the client and cluster in one step:
client.shutdown()
```

## Dask Dashboard

Dask comes with a really handy interface: the Dask Dashboard. It is a web interface that provides real-time insights into task execution, CPU and memory usage, and worker activity. You can retrieve the dashboard link using:

```
client
```
And in the dropdown menu on *Cluster Info*:
```
Dashboard http://127.0.0.1:8787/status
Total threads: 2
Status: running
Workers: 4
Using processes: True
```

The result of creating a Dask `Client` connected to a `LocalCluster` will look similar to the following:
```
Client ID: Client-696a5764-3a87-11f1-adbd-5c6f697c7f20
Connection method: Cluster object
Cluster type: distributed.LocalCluster
Dashboard: http://127.0.0.1:8787/status
```

```{figure} ./dask_images/dask-plugin-3.png

> :alt: Screenshot of a Jupyter notebook interface displaying a code segment initializing a Dask client. The section labeled 'Client' shows connection details, including the connection method, cluster type, and a URL for dashboard access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:alt: Screenshot of a Jupyter notebook interface displaying a code segment initializing a Dask client and the resulting connection details, including the connection method, cluster type, and a URL for dashboard access. Described under the heading Dask Dashboard.
```

[johndoe@c3cpu-a5-u11-1 ~]$ conda activate dask_lab_env
```

#### Step 2: Install Required Packages

```
(dask_lab_env)[johndoe@c3cpu-a5-u11-1 ~]$ conda install -c conda-forge jupyterlab dask distributed
```
Then you can install the [JupyterLab plugin for Dask](https://github.com/dask/dask-labextension)
```
(dask_lab_env)[johndoe@c3cpu-a5-u11-1 ~]$ conda install -c conda-forge nodejs
(dask_lab_env)[johndoe@c3cpu-a5-u11-1 ~]$ conda install -c conda-forge dask-labextension
```

#### Step 3: Launch a Jupyter Session using your custom environment

Once your environment is set up, launch a Jupyter Session using the `dask_lab_env` environment that includes the extension. 

Refer to the documentation here for detailed instructions on selecting and launching a [jupyter session with custom Conda environment](../open_ondemand/jupyter_session.md#launching-a-jupyter-session-using-my-conda-env-conda-environment)

#### Step 4: Use the Dask Extension

After launching JupyterLab, open the Dask tab from the left sidebar. The Dask icon appears alongside other JupyterLab tools such as the file browser and notebook panel.

```{figure} ./dask_images/dask-plugin-1.png

> :alt: Screenshot of a JupyterLab interface showing the Dask extension icon located in the left sidebar alongside notebook and file browser icons and displaying a code snippet for starting a local cluster on the right. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:alt: Screenshot of a JupyterLab interface showing the Dask extension icon located in the left sidebar alongside notebook and file browser icons and displaying a code snippet for starting a local cluster on the right. Described under the heading Step 4: Use the Dask Extension.
```

:align: center
```

The following code demonstrates how a Dask cluster is created in the notebook environment:

```python
import os
import dask
from dask.distributed import LocalCluster, Client

cluster = LocalCluster(
    n_workers=4,
    threads_per_worker=1,
    processes=True
)

```

#### Step 5: Connecting to the Dashboard

To connect the Dask extension to your running cluster, you must provide the dashboard URL.

In Open OnDemand, the dashboard cannot be accessed directly via 127.0.0.1. Instead, it must be routed through the Jupyter proxy.

Modifying the dashboard URL
```
Original dashboard URL:
http://127.0.0.1:8787/status

Open OnDemand session URL:
https://ondemand.rc.colorado.edu/node/<node-name>/<port>/

Accessible dashboard URL:
https://ondemand.rc.colorado.edu/node/<node-name>/<port>/proxy/8787/status
```

```{figure} ./dask_images/dask-plugin-4.png

> :alt: Screenshot showing a JupyterLab session and instructions for modifying the Dask dashboard URL by appending /proxy/8787/status for Open OnDemand access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:alt: Screenshot showing a JupyterLab session and instructions for modifying the Dask dashboard URL by appending /proxy/8787/status for Open OnDemand access. Described under heading Step 5: Connecting to the Dashboard.
```
